README.md, before:

##Guide to Ruby on Rails Bootcamp for IMG @ RIT
=======

###Quick Links
-------
####Ruby Links
* [LearnXinY for Ruby](http://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/ruby/)
* [LearnXinY for Ruby Environment/Setup](http://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/ruby-ecosystem/)
* [Ruby Documentation](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/)

####Rails Links
* [Rails Book](http://ruby.railstutorial.org/ruby-on-rails-tutorial-book) Really good introduction to Rails and backend web development in general. Today we are effectively completing Chapters 1 & 2.
* [Rails Guides](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/)
* [Rails Documentation](http://api.rubyonrails.org/)

####Other Gems (i.e. Packages) & Useful Tools
* [RVM](https://rvm.io/) Ruby Version Manager, installs and switches between rubies. RVM also has the concept of gemsets to isolate projects' environments completely.
* [RubyGems](http://guides.rubygems.org/) Software used to manage what Ruby Packages/Libraries (called gems) are installed.
* [Bundler](http://bundler.io/) Gem dependency resolver.
* [Git](http://git-scm.com/book) Version control software.
* [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/) A cloud application platform that makes it really easy to deploy applications. Deployin basic apps for testing is free.

####Nitrous.io
A cloud development environment, i.e. you can write your program from any browser or terminal that is hooked up to a server located somewhere else.

* [Nitrous.io](https://www.nitrous.io)
* [Nitrous.io sign-up referral link to get N20, which can be turned in for extra ram or space](https://www.nitrous.io/join/qC8ddqET1Ak)

We're using this for two reasons:

1. Getting Ruby and Rails setup properly on Windows is a non-trivial task and this gives an Ubuntu box with a lot of stuff we need already installed which cuts down on startup time
2. This way all the setup we do today doesn't just apply to the lab computer you happen to be on.

If you would like to setup ruby on your own machine I recommend reading through [this guide](http://ruby.railstutorial.org/ruby-on-rails-tutorial-book#sec-up_and_running), which offers various recommendations for Linux, Mac, and Windows machines, 

###Ruby/Rails Setup
-------
We're going to use a Nitrous.io Ruby box, which should come pre installed with Ruby, RVM, and RubyGems. If you want to do this on your own machine, look into [this section of the Rails book.](http://ruby.railstutorial.org/ruby-on-rails-tutorial-book#sec-up_and_running)

1. [Create a Nitrous.io account](https://www.nitrous.io/join/qC8ddqET1Ak)
2. Build a Ruby Box on the East Coast (you can adjust the settings later)
3. After it provisions the box it should pop up the IDE. In Rails programming a lot of work is done in the terminal, so some useful Nitrous shortcuts are:
  * Swap full screen terminal: Ctrl Shift F
  * Swap cursor focus from terminal to ide: Ctrl Shift C
  
  Since we are using an environment already setup for Ruby on Rails development it is for the most part ready to go. Even so it's a good idea to check to make sure everything is as it should be (Nitrous is still in beta and has changed the defaults around a bit) and get some understanding about how all these presets work together.
  
5. Check the Ruby version, it should be 2.0.0psomething
    
    ```ruby -v```

4. RVM is a nice way to swap between different versions of Ruby. It should be installed, to check in the terminal run:

    ```rvm -v```

  This should output: rvm 1.22.something
  
  If you ever get lost in terminal, try running help or --help
  
    ```
    rvm help
    rvm gemset help
    ```
  
  If provided, this will tell you what commands and parameters are available for the given program or sub command.
  
6. RVM uses gem to manage what gems are installed. 

    ```gem list```
    
    Will show what gems and version number are installed already for us by Nitrous
    
    There is a newer version of rails (4.0.1) to update run: (This is optional, shouldn't have any effect with what we're doing today)
    
    ```gem install rails --version 4.0.1```
    
    ```rails -v```
    
    To check if everything went as planned.
    
    There are more gems we will need, but we'll use a gemfile (a list of gems we want) and let Bundler (itself a ruby gem) install these automatically along with any dependencies, more on that later.

###Getting Started with Ruby
-------

To play around with ruby syntax you can run interactive ruby

  ```
    irb
  ```

Which lets you run ruby syntax and watch the responses in real time.

Ruby files are saved with the .rb extenstion.

To run a ruby file in the terminal browse to the appropriate directory with change directory command:

  ```
    cd path/to/file
  ```

and run it:

  ```
    ruby filename.rb
  ```

Or include the filepath in call:

  ```
    ruby path/to/file/filename.rb
  ```

#####Some Stuff to Try in IRB
[example_irb.rb](https://github.com/dropofwill/IMG_RonR_Seminar/blob/master/example_irb.rb) for an overview of Ruby syntax and things to try in irb.

While irb is cool and you can write classes and functions in irb, I don't recommend it. Once you're ready to write multi-line functionality move to the ide and run it from the terminal.

#####Enumerable Objects, Loops, Hashes, and Arrays
[example_enum.rb](https://github.com/dropofwill/IMG_RonR_Seminar/blob/master/example_enum.rb)

#####Functions, Blocks, and Control Structures
[example_functions.rb](https://github.com/dropofwill/IMG_RonR_Seminar/blob/master/example_functions.rb)

#####Classes, Inheritance, Scope, and Getters/Setters
[example_classes.rb](https://github.com/dropofwill/IMG_RonR_Seminar/blob/master/example_classes.rb)


###Ruby Exercise
-------


###Rails Exercise
-------

1. Create a new directory for the app with: make directory

    ```mkdir name_of_your_app```

2. Move into that directory with: change directory

    ```cd name_of_your_app```
    
3. Create a new rails app

    ```rails new```
    
4. Take a look at what this generated for us with: list (ls) all (-a) in a list format (-l)

    ```ls -al```
    
5. Update the gemfile to match the example one in the demo_rails_app repository above. Once completed run:
    
    ```bundle update```
    
    then
    
    ```bundle install --without production```
    
6. While we haven't written any new code yet, rails gives us a very basic app to start with. To run this app type:

    ```rails server```
    
    or
    
    ```rails s```
    
  This will take a few seconds, but it should eventually output something like:
  
    ```=> Rails 4.0.1 application starting in development on http://0.0.0.0:3000```
  
  This tells you what port it is running on, in my case that's Port 3000. To preview the app, in Nitrous click on the Preview menu-item and select the appropriate port. This will open up a new tab with the default page of the application.

7. To make a data model with create, read, update, and delete functionality we can use rails generate scaffold command. For a simple User model we want a unique Id (an integer), a username (a string), and an email (a string). Rails gives us a unique id by default so the final command would be:

    ```rails generate scaffold User name:string email:string```
    
8. This gives us a lot of code and pages, but to make it work we must update (migrate) the database to reflect the new model. To do this use rake, a gem that should already be installed as a rails dependency.
    
    ```rake db:migrate```
    
9. Now try running the app again, at the end of the url type /users . From here we can create a new user, edit existing ones, show a users individual page, and delete the user.

10. That's cool, but what can these users do? Let's make a post resource, it should have a unique id (again provided), content (a string), and a user_id (integer) that connects to the user that created it.

    ```rails generate scaffold Post content:string user_id:integer```
    
    And again migrate the database.
    
    ```rake db:migrate```
    
11. Now we have users and posts, but they aren't connected. To connect them we set the user model so that it has_many posts, and that the posts belongs_to a user.

    Modify app/models/user.rb to
    ```ruby
      class User < ActiveRecord::Base
        has_many :microposts
      end
    ```
    
    Modify app/models/post.rb to
    ```ruby
      class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
        belongs_to :user
      end
    ```

12. This changed the way the model works internally (for instance in the rails console you can now query a user_name.post and get the posts), but there is nothing forcing a post to have a user. To do this we need to validate the users existence before creation. Rails (really the ActiveRecord class that our model is inheriting from) has a method just for this: validates

    Add this line to the Post model class, in app/models/post.rb
    
    ```ruby
    validates :user, presence: true
    ```
    
    The user is represented internally as a symbol (for performance reasons), presence is an attribute of the user. So now before a post is created it checks to make sure the user associated with it still exists.

13. To make this easier to visualize and get some experience with editing views, lets add a column to the index of User and Post to show their id, something scaffolding doesn't show by default. 

    Browse to app/views/users/index.html.erb and add a table header:
    
    ```html
    <th>
      id
    </th>
    ```
    
    Above the name and email table headers. Then add the data below:
    
    ```html
    <td>
      <%= user.id %>
    </td>
    ```
    
    And repeat for the post view.

14. To experiment with rails validation some more let's limit each post to no more than 100 characters or whatever you like.

    Add this to your Post model:
    
    ```ruby
    validates :content, length: { maximum: 100 }
    ```
    
    We can also throw in more validation for the content in the same method call:
    
    ```ruby
    validates :content, presence: true, length: { maximum: 100 }
    ```
    
    This same approach can be applied to the name and email fields for the User model.
    
15. And then finally lets add a dependency to user so that when it is destroyed all the posts associated with it are destroyed as well.

    In the user model class change the has_many line so that it is dependent on destroy call:
    
    ```ruby
    has_many :posts, dependent: :destroy
    ```
    
And that's it! While it may not seem like we've done much, this app is actually accomplishing quite a lot with very little effort on our part. We have a relational database with two models, established dependencies and validation and an interface of views and routes to edit these with.

Commit message:

update ruby exercise part of readme

README.md, after:

##Guide to Ruby on Rails Bootcamp for IMG @ RIT
=======

###Quick Links
-------
####Ruby Links
* [LearnXinY for Ruby](http://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/ruby/)
* [LearnXinY for Ruby Environment/Setup](http://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/ruby-ecosystem/)
* [Ruby Documentation](https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/)

####Rails Links
* [Rails Book](http://ruby.railstutorial.org/ruby-on-rails-tutorial-book) Really good introduction to Rails and backend web development in general. Today we are effectively completing Chapters 1 & 2.
* [Rails Guides](http://guides.rubyonrails.org/)
* [Rails Documentation](http://api.rubyonrails.org/)

####Other Gems (i.e. Packages) & Useful Tools
* [RVM](https://rvm.io/) Ruby Version Manager, installs and switches between rubies. RVM also has the concept of gemsets to isolate projects' environments completely.
* [RubyGems](http://guides.rubygems.org/) Software used to manage what Ruby Packages/Libraries (called gems) are installed.
* [Bundler](http://bundler.io/) Gem dependency resolver.
* [Git](http://git-scm.com/book) Version control software.
* [Heroku](https://www.heroku.com/) A cloud application platform that makes it really easy to deploy applications. Deployin basic apps for testing is free.

####Nitrous.io
A cloud development environment, i.e. you can write your program from any browser or terminal that is hooked up to a server located somewhere else.

* [Nitrous.io](https://www.nitrous.io)
* [Nitrous.io sign-up referral link to get N20, which can be turned in for extra ram or space](https://www.nitrous.io/join/qC8ddqET1Ak)

We're using this for two reasons:

1. Getting Ruby and Rails setup properly on Windows is a non-trivial task and this gives an Ubuntu box with a lot of stuff we need already installed which cuts down on startup time
2. This way all the setup we do today doesn't just apply to the lab computer you happen to be on.

If you would like to setup ruby on your own machine I recommend reading through [this guide](http://ruby.railstutorial.org/ruby-on-rails-tutorial-book#sec-up_and_running), which offers various recommendations for Linux, Mac, and Windows machines, 

###Ruby/Rails Setup
-------
We're going to use a Nitrous.io Ruby box, which should come pre installed with Ruby, RVM, and RubyGems. If you want to do this on your own machine, look into [this section of the Rails book.](http://ruby.railstutorial.org/ruby-on-rails-tutorial-book#sec-up_and_running)

1. [Create a Nitrous.io account](https://www.nitrous.io/join/qC8ddqET1Ak)
2. Build a Ruby Box on the East Coast (you can adjust the settings later)
3. After it provisions the box it should pop up the IDE. In Rails programming a lot of work is done in the terminal, so some useful Nitrous shortcuts are:
  * Swap full screen terminal: Ctrl Shift F
  * Swap cursor focus from terminal to ide: Ctrl Shift C
  
  Since we are using an environment already setup for Ruby on Rails development it is for the most part ready to go. Even so it's a good idea to check to make sure everything is as it should be (Nitrous is still in beta and has changed the defaults around a bit) and get some understanding about how all these presets work together.
  
5. Check the Ruby version, it should be 2.0.0psomething
    
    ```ruby -v```

4. RVM is a nice way to swap between different versions of Ruby. It should be installed, to check in the terminal run:

    ```rvm -v```

  This should output: rvm 1.22.something
  
  If you ever get lost in terminal, try running help or --help
  
    ```
    rvm help
    rvm gemset help
    ```
  
  If provided, this will tell you what commands and parameters are available for the given program or sub command.
  
6. RVM uses gem to manage what gems are installed. 

    ```gem list```
    
    Will show what gems and version number are installed already for us by Nitrous
    
    There is a newer version of rails (4.0.1) to update run: (This is optional, shouldn't have any effect with what we're doing today)
    
    ```gem install rails --version 4.0.1```
    
    ```rails -v```
    
    To check if everything went as planned.
    
    There are more gems we will need, but we'll use a gemfile (a list of gems we want) and let Bundler (itself a ruby gem) install these automatically along with any dependencies, more on that later.

###Getting Started with Ruby
-------

To play around with ruby syntax you can run interactive ruby

  ```
    irb
  ```

Which lets you run ruby syntax and watch the responses in real time.

Ruby files are saved with the .rb extenstion.

To run a ruby file in the terminal browse to the appropriate directory with change directory command:

  ```
    cd path/to/file
  ```

and run it:

  ```
    ruby filename.rb
  ```

Or include the filepath in call:

  ```
    ruby path/to/file/filename.rb
  ```

#####Some Stuff to Try in IRB
[example_irb.rb](https://github.com/dropofwill/IMG_RonR_Seminar/blob/master/example_irb.rb) for an overview of Ruby syntax and things to try in irb.

While irb is cool and you can write classes and functions in irb, I don't recommend it. Once you're ready to write multi-line functionality move to the ide and run it from the terminal.

#####Enumerable Objects, Loops, Hashes, and Arrays
[example_enum.rb](https://github.com/dropofwill/IMG_RonR_Seminar/blob/master/example_enum.rb)

#####Functions, Blocks, and Control Structures
[example_functions.rb](https://github.com/dropofwill/IMG_RonR_Seminar/blob/master/example_functions.rb)

#####Classes, Inheritance, Scope, and Getters/Setters
[example_classes.rb](https://github.com/dropofwill/IMG_RonR_Seminar/blob/master/example_classes.rb)


###Ruby Exercise
-------
Now it's time to build a basic terminal app with Ruby. The goal here is to get a feel for the ruby way of doing things. I built a very basic inventory management app as an example, you can try and build something like that or do your own thing. We'll spend about thirty or so minutes on this.

###Rails Exercise
-------

1. Create a new directory for the app with: make directory

    ```mkdir name_of_your_app```

2. Move into that directory with: change directory

    ```cd name_of_your_app```
    
3. Create a new rails app

    ```rails new```
    
4. Take a look at what this generated for us with: list (ls) all (-a) in a list format (-l)

    ```ls -al```
    
5. Update the gemfile to match the example one in the demo_rails_app repository above. Once completed run:
    
    ```bundle update```
    
    then
    
    ```bundle install --without production```
    
6. While we haven't written any new code yet, rails gives us a very basic app to start with. To run this app type:

    ```rails server```
    
    or
    
    ```rails s```
    
  This will take a few seconds, but it should eventually output something like:
  
    ```=> Rails 4.0.1 application starting in development on http://0.0.0.0:3000```
  
  This tells you what port it is running on, in my case that's Port 3000. To preview the app, in Nitrous click on the Preview menu-item and select the appropriate port. This will open up a new tab with the default page of the application.

7. To make a data model with create, read, update, and delete functionality we can use rails generate scaffold command. For a simple User model we want a unique Id (an integer), a username (a string), and an email (a string). Rails gives us a unique id by default so the final command would be:

    ```rails generate scaffold User name:string email:string```
    
8. This gives us a lot of code and pages, but to make it work we must update (migrate) the database to reflect the new model. To do this use rake, a gem that should already be installed as a rails dependency.
    
    ```rake db:migrate```
    
9. Now try running the app again, at the end of the url type /users . From here we can create a new user, edit existing ones, show a users individual page, and delete the user.

10. That's cool, but what can these users do? Let's make a post resource, it should have a unique id (again provided), content (a string), and a user_id (integer) that connects to the user that created it.

    ```rails generate scaffold Post content:string user_id:integer```
    
    And again migrate the database.
    
    ```rake db:migrate```
    
11. Now we have users and posts, but they aren't connected. To connect them we set the user model so that it has_many posts, and that the posts belongs_to a user.

    Modify app/models/user.rb to
    ```ruby
      class User < ActiveRecord::Base
        has_many :microposts
      end
    ```
    
    Modify app/models/post.rb to
    ```ruby
      class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
        belongs_to :user
      end
    ```

12. This changed the way the model works internally (for instance in the rails console you can now query a user_name.post and get the posts), but there is nothing forcing a post to have a user. To do this we need to validate the users existence before creation. Rails (really the ActiveRecord class that our model is inheriting from) has a method just for this: validates

    Add this line to the Post model class, in app/models/post.rb
    
    ```ruby
    validates :user, presence: true
    ```
    
    The user is represented internally as a symbol (for performance reasons), presence is an attribute of the user. So now before a post is created it checks to make sure the user associated with it still exists.

13. To make this easier to visualize and get some experience with editing views, lets add a column to the index of User and Post to show their id, something scaffolding doesn't show by default. 

    Browse to app/views/users/index.html.erb and add a table header:
    
    ```html
    <th>
      id
    </th>
    ```
    
    Above the name and email table headers. Then add the data below:
    
    ```html
    <td>
      <%= user.id %>
    </td>
    ```
    
    And repeat for the post view.

14. To experiment with rails validation some more let's limit each post to no more than 100 characters or whatever you like.

    Add this to your Post model:
    
    ```ruby
    validates :content, length: { maximum: 100 }
    ```
    
    We can also throw in more validation for the content in the same method call:
    
    ```ruby
    validates :content, presence: true, length: { maximum: 100 }
    ```
    
    This same approach can be applied to the name and email fields for the User model.
    
15. And then finally lets add a dependency to user so that when it is destroyed all the posts associated with it are destroyed as well.

    In the user model class change the has_many line so that it is dependent on destroy call:
    
    ```ruby
    has_many :posts, dependent: :destroy
    ```
    
And that's it! While it may not seem like we've done much, this app is actually accomplishing quite a lot with very little effort on our part. We have a relational database with two models, established dependencies and validation and an interface of views and routes to edit these with.
